



Network Working Group                                            Y. Yang
Internet-Draft                                                     Q. Wu
Intended status: Informational                                    Huawei
Expires: 5 December 2025                                     3 June 2025


             Applicability of A2A to the Network Management
                        draft-yang-a2a-nm-latest

Abstract

   This document discusses the applicability of A2A to the network
   management in the multi-domain heterogeneous network environment that
   utilizes IETF technologies.  It explores operational aspect, key
   components, generic workflow and deployment scenarios.  The impact of
   integrating A2A into the network management system is also discussed.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   The latest revision of this draft can be found at
   https://Yuanyuan4666.github.io/A2A/draft-yang-a2a-nm.html.  Status
   information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-yang-a2a-nm/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/Yuanyuan4666/A2A.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 5 December 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2025 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Overview of key challenges for the network management
     3.1.  Limitations of 3rd party management in Heterogeneous
           Network Environments
     3.2.  Static Data format or Data model for management interface,
           unable to adapt to the speed of service roll out
     3.3.  Lack integration with Network APIs
   4.  Operational Consideration
   5.  Architecture Overview
     5.1.  Multi-Agent Communication Deployment Scenario
   6.  Impact of integrating A2A on Network Management
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Informative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   With the advancement of large language models (LLMs), the concept of
   AI agents has gradually attracted significant attention.  An AI agent
   refers to a category of software applications that utilizes LLMs to
   interact with users or other agents and accomplish specific tasks.
   Take A multimodal AI agent as an example, it can collaborate with
   other domain-specific agents to complete diverse tasks such as
   translation, configuration generation, and API development.

   A2A provides a standardized way for AI agents to communicate and
   collaborate across different platforms and frameworks through a
   structured process, regardless of their underlying technologies.
   Agents can advertise their capabilities using an 'Agent Card' in JSON
   format, or send messages to communicate context, replies, artifacts,
   or user instructions, which make it easier to build AI applications
   that can interact with heterogeneous AI ecosystems in specific
   domain.

   With significant adoption of AI Agents across the Internet,Agent to
   Agent Communication protocol may become the foundation for the next
   wave of Internet communication technologies across domains
   [I-D.rosenberg-ai-protocols].  The application of A2A in the network
   management field is meant to develop various rich AI driven network
   applications, realize intent based networks management automation in
   the multi-vendor heterogeneous network environment.  By establishing
   standard interfaces for dynamic Capability Discovery, intelligent
   message routing, heterogeneous AI ecosystems interaction,cross-
   platform collaboration, A2A enables:

   o Workflows that span a long duration or involve many stages

   o Data Sharing and tasks completion that require cross-system
   collaboration

   o Coordination Between Specialized Agents

   This document discusses the applicability of A2A to the network
   management in the multi-domain heterogeneous network environment that
   utilizes IETF technologies.  It explores operational aspect, key
   components, generic workflow and deployment scenarios.  The impact of
   integrating A2A into the network management system is also discussed.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   *  AI Agent: A software system or program that is capable of
      autonomously performing goals and tasks on behalf of a user or
      another system.

   *  Agent Card: A common metadata file that describes an agent's
      capabilities, skills, interface URLs, and authentication
      requirements.  Clients discover and identify the agent through
      this file.

   *  A2A Server: An AI agent that receives requests and performs tasks

   *  A2A Client: An AI agent that sends requests to servers

3.  Overview of key challenges for the network management

   In large scale network management environment, a large number of
   devices from different network vendors need to be uniformly managed,
   especially in the heterogeneous network environment which can lead to
   the following issues:

3.1.  Limitations of 3rd party management in Heterogeneous Network
      Environments

   In the multi-vendor heterogeneous environment,vendors implementations
   of YANG models and NETCONF/RESTCONF protocols exhibit significant
   divergence.  Different vendors implement different YANG models such
   as IETF YANG, Openconfig YANG, Vendor specific YANG.  Some vendors
   only partially support standard Network management protocols while
   Other vendors might choose non-stanard network management protocol or
   telemetry protocol such as gnmi, grpc.  Without standard protocol or
   open programmable framework with multi-vendors integration drivers,
   integration various different data models and management protocols
   and allowing quickly adapt to different device are still big
   challenges.  The same challenge is applied to multi-domain
   heterogeneous environment.

3.2.  Static Data format or Data model for management interface, unable
      to adapt to the speed of service roll out

   The IETF is currently working on and also publishing a set of YANG
   models for network service configuration.  Network Service
   configurations are built from a combination of network element and
   protocol configuration, but are specified to service users in more
   abstract terms, which enables service agility to speed service
   creation and delivery and allows the deployment of innovative new
   services across networks.  However Network service model provide
   static interface with a fixed, unchanging format, it is unable to
   adapt to new service requirements, e.g., when some new service
   attributes are introduced and correlated with the specific network
   service model A or knowledge graph B using RDF, it is hard to expose
   these new attributes or capability through the same management
   interface which is using network service model A.

3.3.  Lack integration with Network APIs

   Today, network API has been widely adopted by the northbound
   interface of OSS/BSS or Network orchestrator while YANG data models
   have been widely adopted by the northbound interface of the network
   controller or the interface between the network controller and the
   network devices.  However Network API ecosystem and YANG model
   ecosystem are both built as silo and lack integration or mapping
   between them.

4.  Operational Consideration

   This section outlines operational aspects of A2A with Network
   management requirements as follows:

   *  _Domain-Specific AI Agents_: For appropriately scoped domains,
      high-quality domain-specific training data yields optimally
      performing agents that demonstrate superior effectiveness within
      their target operational environments.

   *  _Dynamic Capability Discovery_: Agent can automatically detect and
      understand each other's capabilities, enabling more intelligent
      and adaptive interactions.

   *  _Automated Workflow coordination, delegation_: To mitigate error
      accumulation, semantic drift, and hallucination propagation
      phenomena, the AI Agent shall demonstrate the ability to:

      -  comprehend high-level user intent

      -  execute extended workflow sequences

      -  implement cross-verification mechanisms throughout prolonged
         operations

5.  Architecture Overview

   Large language models (LLMs) inherently excel at understanding
   complex user instructions, a capability that becomes even more
   pronounced in an AI agent-to-agent (A2A) architecture.  Beyond merely
   comprehending sophisticated requirements, they can autonomously
   orchestrate lengthy network management workflows, making them
   particularly suitable for large-scale network management scenarios.
   Therefore, we have introduced the A2A protocol in the network
   management environments for building an intelligent network
   management and control platform.

5.1.  Multi-Agent Communication Deployment Scenario

                                   +-------------+
                                   |    User     |
                                   +-----+-------+
                                         |
                                   +-----+-------+
                                 Service Orchestrator
                                   | (AI Agent)  |
                                   +-----+-------+
                                         |Agent to Agent
                     +-------------------+------------------+
                     |                   |                  |
                +----+-------+     +-----+-------+     +----+------+
              Network Controller  Network Controller  Network Controller
                |(AI Agent)  |     | (AI Agent)  |     |(AI Agent) |
                +----+-------+     +-----+-------+     +----+------+
                     |                   |                  |
                     |                   |                  |
              Agent to tools       Agent to  tools      Agent to tools
                     |                   |                  |
                     |             +-----+-------+          |
                     +-------------+  Network    +----------+
                                   |  Devices    |
                                   +-------------+

   In the multi-agent communication deployment scenario, AI Agents can
   be deployed at both service layer and network layer,e.g., both
   service orchestrator and network controller can introduce AI Agent
   and allow Agent to Agent communication.  AI Agent within the service
   orchestrator can provide registry database for other service agents
   within the network controller to register its location.

   The interaction in the multi-agent communication deployment scenario
   can be break down into:

   *  _AI Agent to Agent interaction_

   *  _AI Agent to Tool interaction_

   For AI Agent to Tool interaction, to enable comprehensive
   functionality, additional protocol extensions are required to address
   two critical aspects: (1) standardized tool invocation mechanisms for
   agent-tool interoperability, and (2) monitoring frameworks for tool
   usage tracking and auditing.

   AI Agent to Agent interaction, users require a real-time monitoring
   interface for long-running workflows or tasks requiring continuous
   supervision with dual capabilities: (1) live network state
   observation and (2) validation of agent-proposed remediation actions
   during anomaly resolution scenarios.

   A general workflow is as follows:

   *  User Input Submission: An operator submits a natural language
      request to a central AI agent.

   *  Agent Intent Processing: The central AI agent processes natural
      language inputs by parsing instructions into structured tasks.

   *  Workflow Graph Decision: The central AI agent decomposing tasks
      into workflow graphs, and distributes subtasks via an Agent Card
      Registry to specialized subordinate agents based on their
      capabilities.

   *  Iteration continues until all tasks reach executable leaf-tier
      agents in the hierarchy.

   *  Leaf agents report outcomes to the central agent, which
      dynamically adjusts the workflow based on result analysis and
      policy rules.

6.  Impact of integrating A2A on Network Management

   A2A leverages advanced machine learning models or knowledge graph
   models and sophisticated communication protocols such as one built on
   top of HTTP, SSE, JSON-RPC.

   Unlike REST or NETCONF/RESTCONF, other open API that follow
   predefined, static request-response patterns, A2A introduces a more
   adaptive communication model which transforms these interactions into
   dynamic, context-aware conversations.

   In addition, Agents can now negotiate, interpret subtle contextual
   cues, and make collaborative decisions in real-time.

7.  Security Considerations

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

9.  Informative References

   [I-D.rosenberg-ai-protocols]
              Rosenberg, J. and C. F. Jennings, "Framework, Use Cases
              and Requirements for AI Agent Protocols", Work in
              Progress, Internet-Draft, draft-rosenberg-ai-protocols-00,
              5 May 2025, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-
              rosenberg-ai-protocols-00>.

Authors' Addresses

   Yuanyuan Yang
   Huawei
   Email: yangyuanyuan55@huawei.com


   Qin Wu
   Huawei
   Email: bill.wu@huawei.com
